[Page 5]
“It is the Word of God, to be kept holy forever…”
“This time there will be no failure, no loss of truth, no 
misunderstanding and no misrepresentation
I will direct its growth as it reaches from the paper on which
it was written into the hearts for which it was intended.”
(Special Message 12/31/75)
As preface to this edition of A Course In Miracles, we acknowledge
our realization of the truth of the words spoken to us through Helen
Schucman as those of Jesus,“the Way, the Truth and the Life.”
To

[Page 7]
p u b l i s h e r ’s  n o t e
In the months from September to the beginning of December 1975,
reportedly Helen scribed the section of A Course In Miracles which has
been known up till now as the Clariﬁcation of Terms and was considered as
an “appendix.”
For this presentation of Jesus’ masterpiece, it has been placed as
PREFACE and is simply titled THE USE OF TERMS which is consistent
with the original heading of the dictation and retains the style of its
scribing.
If you ﬁnd our placement of THE

[Page 9]
P R E F A C E
v
t h e  u s e  o f  t e r m s
This is not a course in theoretical philosophy,nor is it concerned with
precise terminology in connection with origins. It is concerned only with
Atonement, or the correction of perception.The means of the Atonement
is forgiveness. The structure of “individual consciousness” is essentially
irrelevant, because it is a concept representing the “original error” or the
“original sin.”To study the error itself does not lead to correction,if you are
indeed 

[Page 10]
Spirit is God’s one Son,or Christ.In this world,because the mind is split,the
Sons of God appear to be separate. Nor do their minds seem to be joined. In
this illusory state the concept of an “individual mind” seems to be
meaningful. It is therefore described in the course as if it has two parts; spirit
and ego.Spirit is the part that is still in contact with God through the Holy
Spirit, Who abides in this part but sees the other part as well. The term
“soul” is not used except in direct Biblica

[Page 11]
a world of form the ego cannot be denied, for it alone seems real. How
could God’s Son as He created him abide in form or in a world of form?
Who asks you to deﬁne the ego and explain how it arose can be but he
who thinks it real,and seeks by deﬁnition to ensure that its illusive nature is
concealed behind the words that seem to make it so.There is no deﬁnition
for a lie that serves to make it true. Nor can there be a truth that lies
conceal effectively.
The ego’s unreality is not denied by word

[Page 12]
was.And what it is, is wholly uncondemned and wholly pure.
The miracle forgives; the ego damns. Neither need be deﬁned except
by this.Yet could a deﬁnition be more sure, or more in line with what
salvation asks? Problem and answer lie together here, and having met at last
the choice is clear. Who chooses hell when it is recognized? And who
would not go on a little while when it is given him to understand the way
is short and Heaven is his goal?
Forgiveness is for God and toward God but not of Hi

[Page 13]
Son. But look on this and you have been forgiven. How lovely does the
world become in just that single instant when you see the truth about
yourself reﬂected there. Now you are sinless and behold your sinlessness.
Now you are holy and perceive it so. And now the mind returns to its
Creator; the joining of the Father and the Son; the Unity of unities that
stands behind all joining but still beyond them all. God is not seen but only
understood. His Son is not attacked but recognized.
The world you

[Page 14]
This is the shift that true perception brings: what was projected out is
seen within and there forgiveness lets it disappear. For there the altar to the
Son is set,and there his Father is remembered.Here are all illusions brought
to truth and laid upon the altar. What is seen outside must lie beyond
forgiveness, for it seems to be forever sinful.Where is hope while sin is seen
as outside? What remedy can guilt expect? But seen within your mind,guilt
and forgiveness for an instant lie together, s

[Page 15]
their own illusions.
In his complete identiﬁcation with the Christ, the perfect Son of God,
His one creation and His happiness, forever like Himself and one with Him
— Jesus became what all of us must be. He led the way for us to follow him.
He leads us back to God because he saw the road before him, and he
followed it. He made a clean distinction, still obscure to us, between the false
and true. He offered us all a ﬁnal demonstration it is impossible to kill God’s
Son; nor can his life in any w

[Page 16]
form is not his reality Which God alone knows along with Christ, His real
Son,Who is part of Him.
The Holy Spirit is described throughout the course as giving us the
answer to the separation and bringing the plan of the Atonement to us,
establishing our particular part in it, and showing us exactly what it is. He
has established Jesus as the leader in carrying out this plan, since he was the
ﬁrst to complete his own part perfectly. All power in Heaven and earth is
therefore given him, and he wil

[Page 21]
Contents
O N E
INTRODUCTION TO MIRACLES  . . . . . . . . . . .1
Principles of Miracles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Distortions of Miracle Impulses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
T W O
THE ILLUSION OF SEPARATION . . . . . . . . . . .20
The Reinterpretation of Defenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
Healing as Release from Fear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
Fear as Lack of Love  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

[Page 22]
S I X
ATTACK AND FEAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .117
The Message of the Cruciﬁxion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .118
The Uses of Projection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .123
The Relinquishment of Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .126
The Only Answer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .128
“To Have, Give All to All”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .131
“To Have Peace,Teach Peace to Learn It” . . . . . . . . . . .

[Page 23]
T E N
GOD AND THE EGO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .233
Projection versus Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .234
The Willingness for Healing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .237
From Darkness to Light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .239
The Inheritance of God’s Son  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .241
The “Dynamics” of the Ego . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .243
Experience and Perception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

[Page 24]
F I F T E E N
THE PURPOSE OF TIME  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .347
The Uses of Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .347
Time and Eternity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .351
Littleness versus Magnitude  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .353
Practicing the Holy Instant  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .356
The Holy Instant and Special Relationships  . . . . . . . . . .358
The Holy Instant and the Laws of God  . . . . . . . . 

[Page 25]
N I N E T E E N
BEYOND THE BODY  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .449
Healing and the Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .449
Sin versus Error  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .453
The Unreality of Sin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .455
Obstacles to Peace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .459
I.The Desire to Get Rid of It  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .459
The Attraction of Guilt  . . . . . . . . . . 

[Page 26]
T W E N T Y  
T H R E E
THE WAR AGAINST YOURSELF  . . . . . . . . . . .539
The Irreconcilable Beliefs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .540
The “Laws” of Chaos  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .543
Salvation without Compromise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .549
The Fear of Life  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .551
T W E N T Y  
F O U R
SPECIALNESS AND SEPARATION  . . . . . . . . .554
Specialness as a Substitute for Love . . . . . . 

[Page 27]
T W E N T Y  
S E V E N
THE BODY AND THE DREAM  . . . . . . . . . . . .621
The Picture of Cruciﬁxion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .621
The Fear of Healing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .624
The Symbol of the Impossible  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .628
The Quiet Answer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .630
The Healing Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .632
The Purpose of Pain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

[Page 28]
T H I RT Y  
O N E
THE SIMPLICITY OF SALVATION  . . . . . . . . .702
The Illusion of an Enemy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .705
The Self-Accused  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .708
The Real Alternative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .710
Self-Concept versus Self  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .713
Recognizing the Spirit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .718
The Savior’s Vision  . . . . . . . . . . . . 

[Page 31]
o n e
Introduction to Miracles
This is a course in miracles.It is a required course.Only the time you
take it is voluntary.Free will does not mean that you can establish the
curriculum. It means only that you may elect what you want to take
at a given time.The course does not aim at teaching the meaning of
love, for that is beyond what can be taught. It does aim, however, at
removing the blocks to the awareness of love’s Presence, Which is
your natural inheritance.The opposite of love is fear, b

[Page 32]
their Source,Which is far beyond human evaluation.
3.
Miracles occur naturally as expressions of love.The real miracle
is the love that inspires them. In this sense, everything that
comes from love is a miracle.
4.
All miracles mean life, and God is the Giver of life. His Voice
will direct you very speciﬁcally.You will be told all you need
to know.
5.
Miracles are habits and should be involuntary.They should not
be under conscious control. Consciously selected miracles can
be misguided.
6.
Mirac

[Page 33]
into magic, which is mindless, and therefore destructive; or
rather, the uncreative use of mind.
15. Each day should be devoted to miracles.The purpose of time is
to enable man to learn to use it constructively.Time is thus a
teaching device, and a means to an end. It will cease when it is
no longer useful in facilitating learning.
16. Miracles are teaching devices for demonstrating that it is more
blessed to give than to receive.They simultaneously increase the
strength of the giver and supply 

[Page 34]
in true perspective. This heals at ALL levels, because sickness
comes from confusing the levels.
When you have become willing to hide nothing, you will
not only be willing to enter into communion, but will also
understand peace and joy. Your commitment is not yet total,
and that is why you still have more to learn than to teach.When
your equilibrium stabilizes, you will be able to teach as much as
you learn, which will give you the proper balance. Meanwhile,
remember that no effort is wasted, fo

[Page 35]
created, just as everyone was.When you have been restored to
the recognition of your original state,you naturally become part
of the Atonement yourself. As you share MY inability to
tolerate lack of love in yourself and others, you MUST join the
Great Crusade to correct it. The slogan for the Crusade is
“Listen, learn, and DO; ” – Listen to my voice, learn to undo
error, and DO something to correct it.
The power to work miracles BELONGS to you. I will
provide the opportunities to do them, but YO

[Page 36]
communication between God and His Souls, involving an
extremely personal sense of closeness to Creation, which man
tries to find in physical relationships. Physical closeness
CANNOT achieve this. The subconscious impulses properly
induce miracles, which are genuinely interpersonal, and result
in real closeness to others. This can be misunderstood by a
PERSONALLY willful consciousness as impulses toward
physical gratiﬁcation.
Revelation unites Souls directly with God. Miracles unite
minds directl

[Page 37]
see them in proper alignment. This places the Spirit at the
center, where Souls can communicate directly.
31. Miracles should inspire gratitude, not awe. Man should thank
God for what he really is.The Children of God are very holy,
and the miracle honors their holiness. God’s Creations never
lose their holiness, although it can be hidden. The miracle
uncovers it, and brings it into the light where it belongs.
Holiness can never be really hidden in darkness, but man can
deceive himself about it.T

[Page 38]
their brothers.
The forgiven ARE the means of Atonement.Those released
by Christ must join in releasing their brothers, for this is the
Plan of the Atonement. Miracles are the way in which minds
which serve the Spirit unite with Christ for the salvation, or
release, of all God’s Creations.
35. Miracles are expressions of love,but it does NOT follow that they
will always have observable effects. I am the only one who can
perform miracles indiscriminately, because I AM the Atonement.
You have a RO

[Page 39]
them vulnerable to the distortions of others, since their OWN
perception of themselves is distorted. The miracle worker can
ONLY bless, and thus undoes their distortions, and frees them
from prison.
37. Miracles are examples of right thinking. Reality contact at all
levels becomes strong and accurate, thus permitting correct
delineation of intra – and interpersonal boundaries.As a result,
the doer’s perceptions are aligned with truth as God created it.
38. A miracle is a correction factor introd

[Page 40]
absent in spirit.
“God is not mocked”is not a warning,but a reassurance on
this point. God WOULD be mocked if any of His Creations
lacked holiness. The Creation IS whole, and the mark of
wholeness is holiness.
42. Wholeness is the perceptual content of miracles. It thus corrects,
or atones for, the faulty perception of lack anywhere.
Here we begin to make the fundamental distinction
between miracles and projection.The stimulus MUST precede
the response,and will also determine the kind of respons

[Page 41]
offers only protection to man. It is those who have not yet
“changed their minds” who entered the “hellﬁre” concept
into it.
I assure you that I will witness for anyone who lets me, and
to whatever extent he permits it. YOUR witnessing demonstrates
YOUR belief, and thus strengthens it.Those who witness for me
are expressing, through their miracles, that they have abandoned
the belief in deprivation in favor of the abundance they have
learned BELONGS to them.
43. A MAJOR contribution of miracles 

[Page 42]
the awareness of the miracle worker himself. The impersonal
nature of miracles is because the Atonement itself is one, uniting
all creations with their Creator.
45. The miracle is an expression of an inner awareness of Christ,
and the acceptance of His Atonement. The mind is then in a
state of grace, and naturally becomes gracious, both to the Host
within and the stranger without. By bringing in the stranger, he
becomes your brother.
46. A miracle is never lost. It touches many people you do not

[Page 43]
equals. Equals cannot be in awe of one another because awe
implies inequality. It is therefore an inappropriate reaction to
me. An elder brother is entitled to respect for his greater
experience, and a reasonable amount of obedience for his
greater wisdom. He is also entitled to love because he IS a
brother, and also to devotion if he is devoted. It is only my
devotion that entitles me to yours.There is nothing about me
that YOU cannot attain.I have nothing that does not come from
God. The main 

[Page 44]
lower communication, keeping the direct channel from God to
man open for revelation.Revelation is not reciprocal.It is always
FROM God TO man. The miracle IS reciprocal because it
involves equality.
50. The miracle is a learning device which lessens the need for
time. In the longitudinal or horizontal plane, the recognition of
the true equality of all the members of the Sonship appears to
involve almost endless time. However, the sudden shifts from
horizontal to vertical perception which the mir

[Page 45]
reduce his creativity to almost nothing, and even introduce a
developmental arrest or even a regression. But he CANNOT
abolish his creativity. He can destroy his medium of
communication, but NOT his potential.
Man was NOT created by his own free will alone.Only what
HE creates is his to decide. The basic decision of the miracle-
minded is not to wait on time any longer than is necessary.Time
can waste as well as be wasted. The miracle-worker, therefore,
accepts the time-control factor gladly, be

[Page 46]
attribute. The body is the mechanism for behavior. The belief
that he COULD be better off is the reason why man has this
mechanism at his disposal.
Each one acts according to the particular hierarchy of
needs he establishes for himself. His hierarchy, in turn, depends
on his perception of what he IS; that is, what he LACKS.A sense
of separation from God is the ONLY lack he really needs to
correct.This sense of separation would never have occurred if
he had not distorted his perception of truth, 

[Page 47]
his own errors. It is most difﬁcult to free him by ordinary
means, because he is more consistent in his own denial of truth.
The miracle, however, makes no such distinctions. It corrects
errors BECAUSE they are errors. Thus, the next point to
remember about miracles is:
52. The miracle makes NO distinction among degrees of
misperception. It is a device for perception-correction, effective
quite apart from either the degree or the direction of the error.
This is its TRUE indiscriminateness.
Chris

[Page 48]
But
“Only perfect love REALLY exists.
If there IS fear,
It creates a state which does not exist.”
Believe this, and you WILL be free. Only God can establish this
solution and THIS faith IS His gift.
DISTORTIONS OF MIRACLE IMPULSES
You are involved in unconscious distortions which are producing a
dense cover over miracle impulses, and which make it hard for them
to reach consciousness.The nature of any interpersonal relationship
is limited or deﬁned by what you want it to DO. Relating is a way of

[Page 49]
because NOT doing It is a denial of self. DENIAL of error results in
projection. CORRECTION of error brings release.“Lead us not into
temptation” means “do not let us deceive ourselves into believing
that we can relate in peace to God or to our brothers with
ANYTHING external.”
Child of God, you were created to create the good, the
beautiful, and the holy. Do not lose sight of this.The love of God, for
a little while, must still be expressed through one body to another
because the real vision is

[Page 50]
t w o
The Illusion of Separation
This section deals with a fundamental misuse of knowledge, referred
to in the Bible as the cause of the “fall,”or separation.There are some
deﬁnitions which I asked you to take from the dictionary which will
be helpful here.They are somewhat unusual, since they are not the
ﬁrst deﬁnitions which are given. Nevertheless, the fact that each of
them does appear in the dictionary should be reassuring.
Project (verb): to extend forward or out.
Project (noun): a plan in

[Page 51]
Creative Ability from Himself to the Souls He created, and He also
imbued them with the same loving will to create.The Soul has not
only been fully created, but has also been created perfect. There is
NO emptiness in it.Because of its likeness to its Creator,it is creative.
No Child of God can lose this ability because it is inherent in what
he IS, but he CAN use it inappropriately. Whenever projection is
used inappropriately, it ALWAYS implies that some emptiness or lack
exists, and that it is 

[Page 52]
listened, all he heard was untruth. He does not have to continue to
believe what is not true unless he chooses to do so. All of his
miscreations can literally disappear in “the twinkling of an eye,”
because they are merely visual misperceptions. Man’s Spiritual eye
can sleep, but a sleeping eye can still see. What is seen in dreams
seems to be very real.The Bible mentions that “a deep sleep fell upon
Adam,” and nowhere is there any reference to his waking up.
The history of man in the world as h

[Page 53]
In reality, you are perfectly unaffected by ALL expressions of
lack of love.These can be either from yourself AND others, or from
yourself TO others, or from others to YOU. Peace is an attribute in
YOU. You cannot ﬁnd it outside. All mental illness is some form
of EXTERNAL searching. Mental health is INNER peace. It enables
you to remain unshaken by lack of love from without, and capable,
through your own miracles, of correcting the external conditions
which proceed from lack of love in others.


[Page 54]
Your mind is NOT serving the Soul.This literally starves the Soul by
denying its daily bread. God offers ONLY mercy. YOUR words
should reﬂect only mercy because that is what you have received,and
that is what you should GIVE.
Justice is a temporary expedient, or an attempt to teach man the
meaning of mercy. Its judgemental side arises only because man is
capable of INjustice, if that is what his mind creates.You are afraid of
God’s Will because you have used your own will, which He created
in th

[Page 55]
INDEED create man’s perception, both of himself and of the world.
They can distort or correct, depending on what you use them FOR.
Denial should be directed only to error, and projection should
be reserved only for truth.You should truly give as you have truly
received. The Golden Rule can work effectively only on this basis.
Intellectualisation is a term which stems from the mind-brain
confusion. “Rightmindedness” is the device which defends the
RIGHT mind, and gives it control over the body.“I

[Page 56]
have not learned to be consistent about this as yet. I have therefore
concentrated on showing you that the means ARE available whenever
you ASK.You can,however,save a lot of time if you do not extend this
step unduly.The correct focus will shorten it immeasurably.
The Atonement is the ONLY defense which cannot be used
destructively. That is because, while everyone must eventually join
it, it is NOT a device which was generated by man.The Atonement
PRINCIPLE was in effect long before the Atonemen

[Page 57]
Learning itself, like the classrooms in which it occurs, is temporary.
The ability to learn has no value when change of understanding is
no longer necessary. The eternally creative have nothing to learn.
Only after the separation was it necessary to direct the creative forces
to learning, because changed behavior had become mandatory.
Men can learn to improve their behavior, and can also learn to
become better and better learners. This serves to bring them into
closer and closer accord with the 

[Page 58]
disrupted there is a period of real disorientation, accompanied by
fear, guilt, and usually vacillations between anxiety and depression.
This course is different in that defenses are NOT being disrupted but
REINTERPRETED, even though you may experience it as the same
thing. In the reinterpretation of defenses, only their use for ATTACK
is lost. Since this means they can be used only ONE way, they
become much stronger and much more dependable.They no longer
oppose the Atonement, but greatly facil

[Page 59]
WITHIN man the one defense against ALL separation mind-errors
which can make him perfectly invulnerable.
The acceptance of the Atonement by everyone is only a matter
of time. In fact, both time AND matter were created for this purpose.
This appears to contradict free will because of the inevitability of the
ﬁnal decision. If you review the idea carefully, however, you will
realize that this is not true. Everything is limited in some way by the
manner of its creation. Free will can temporize, and

[Page 60]
to make themselves more comfortable by inappropriate means. But
the real means is ALREADY provided, and does not involve any
effort at all on their part.Their egocentricity usually misperceives this
as personally insulting, an interpretation which obviously arises from
their misperception of themselves. Egocentricity and communion
CANNOT coexist. Even the terms are contradictory.
The Atonement is the only gift that is worthy of being offered
to the altar of God.This is because of the inestimable

[Page 61]
can take two forms;it can be believed that the mind can miscreate IN
the body, or that the body can miscreate in the mind. If it is
understood that the mind, which is the ONLY level of creation,
cannot create beyond itself, neither type of confusion need occur.
The reason only the mind can create is more obvious than may
be immediately apparent.The Soul HAS BEEN created.The body is a
learning device for the mind. Learning devices are not lessons in
themselves.Their purpose is merely to facilitat

[Page 62]
it is expressed. In fact, if it is truly used, it will inevitably BE expressed
in whatever way is most helpful to the receiver. This means that a
miracle, to attain its full efﬁcacy, MUST be expressed in a language
which the recipient can understand WITHOUT fear. It does not
follow, by any means, that this is the highest level of communication
of which he is capable. It DOES mean, however, that it is the highest
level of communication of which he is capable NOW.The whole aim
of the miracle is to

[Page 63]
creations.As long as their sense of vulnerability persists, they should
be preserved from even attempting miracles.
We have already said that the miracle is an expression of
miracle-mindedness. Miracle-mindedness merely means right-
mindedness in the sense that we are now using it.The right-minded
neither exalt nor depreciate the mind of the miracle worker OR the
miracle receiver. However, as a creative act, the miracle need not
await the right-mindedness of the receiver. In fact, its purpose is

[Page 64]
the mind is capable of illumination.The Soul is already illuminated,
and the body in itself is too dense.The mind, however, can bring ITS
illumination TO the body by recognizing that density is the opposite
of intelligence, and therefore unamenable to independent learning. It
is, however, easily brought into alignment with a mind which has
learned to look beyond density toward light.
Corrective learning always begins with the awakening of the
Spiritual eye, and the turning away from the belief i

[Page 65]
more powerful love-encompassment which is FAR beyond any form
of charity that man can conceive of as yet. Charity is essential to
right-mindedness in the limited sense in which right-mindedness
can now be attained. Charity is a way of looking at another AS IF he
had already gone far beyond his actual accomplishments in time.
Since his own thinking is faulty he cannot see the Atonement for
himself, or he would have no need for charity.The charity which is
accorded him is both an acknowledgment th

[Page 66]
which you would do well to look at clearly. YOU believe that you are
responsible for what you DO, but NOT for what you THINK.The
truth is that you ARE responsible for what you think because it is
only at this level that you CAN exercise choice.
What you do COMES FROM what you think. You cannot
separate yourself from the truth by “giving” autonomy to behavior.
This is controlled by me automatically,as soon as you place what you
think under my guidance.Whenever you are afraid, it is a sure sign
th

[Page 67]
you are doing what you do NOT will.This arouses a sense of
coercion, which usually produces rage. The rage then invades
the mind, and projection in the wrong sense is likely to follow.
Depression or anxiety is virtually certain.
Remember that whenever there is fear, it is because you have
NOT MADE UP YOUR MIND.Your will is split, and your behavior
inevitably becomes erratic. Correcting at the behavioral level can
shift the error from the ﬁrst to the second type of strain described
above, but wil

[Page 68]
then, that when you are afraid you have placed yourself in a position
where you NEED Atonement, because you have done something
loveless, having willed without love.This is precisely the situation for
which the Atonement was offered.The need for the remedy inspired
its creation.As long as you recognize only the need for the remedy,
you will remain fearful. However, as soon as you REMEDY it, you
have also abolished the fear.This is how true healing occurs.
Everyone experiences fear, and no-one en

[Page 69]
escape. Death wishes do not kill in the physical sense, but they DO
kill spiritual awareness. ALL destructive thinking is dangerous. Given
a death wish, a man has no choice except to ACT upon the thought,
or behave CONTRARY to it. He thus chooses only between
homicide and fear. The other possibility is that he depreciates the
power of his thought. This is the usual psychoanalytic approach. It
DOES allay guilt, but at the cost of rendering thinking impotent. If
you believe that what you think is 

[Page 70]
true cause and effect which every miracle worker must have.
Both miracles AND fear come from thoughts, and if you were
not free to choose one, you would also not be free to choose the
other. By choosing the miracle you HAVE rejected fear.You have
been afraid of God, of me, of yourselves, and of practically everyone
you know at one time or another. This is because you have
misperceived or miscreated us, and believe in what you have made.
You would never have done this if you were not afraid of yo

[Page 71]
NEED be mastered. The essential resolution rests entirely on the
mastery of LOVE. In the interim, the SENSE of conﬂict is inevitable,
since man has placed himself in a strangely illogical position. He
believes in the power of what does not exist.
Two concepts which CANNOT coexist are “nothing” and
“everything.”To whatever extent one is believed in, the other HAS
BEEN denied. In the conﬂict fear is really nothing, and love is
everything. This is because whenever light enters darkness, the
darknes

[Page 72]
of nothingness. The correction of this error is the Atonement. We
have already brieﬂy spoken about readiness, but there are some
additional points which might be helpful here. Readiness is nothing
more than the PREREQUISITE for accomplishment. The two
should not be confused.As soon as a state of readiness occurs, there is
usually some will to accomplish, but this is by no means necessarily
undivided.The state does not imply more than a POTENTIAL for a
shift of will.
Conﬁdence cannot develop full

[Page 73]
over a similarly long period, and perhaps an even longer one. Its
length depends,however,on the effectiveness of the present speed-up.
We have frequently noted that the miracle is a device for
shortening but not abolishing time. If a sufﬁcient number of people
become truly miracle-minded quickly, the shortening process can be
almost immeasurable. It is essential, however, that these individuals
free themselves from fear sooner than would ordinarily be the case,
because they must emerge from the 

[Page 74]
cannot be directed toward himself because he is not his own
creation. He can, however, apply it meaningfully and at ANY time to
everything he has created, and retain in his memory ONLY what is
good. This is what his right-mindedness cannot BUT dictate. The
purpose of time is solely to “give him time” to achieve this
judgement. It is his own perfect judgement of his own creations.
When everything he retains is loveable, there IS no reason for fear to
remain with him.This IS his part in the Atonem

[Page 75]
Th r e e
Retraining the Mind
This is a course in MIND TRAINING. All learning involves
attention and study at some level. Some of the later parts of the
course rest too heavily on these earlier sections not to require their
study.You will also need them for preparation.Without this, you may
become much too fearful when the unexpected DOES occur to
make constructive use of it. However, as you study these earlier
sections, you will begin to see some of their implications, which will
be ampliﬁed con

[Page 76]
explained to you. Revelation may occasionally REVEAL the end to
you, but to reach it the means are needed.
SPECIAL PRINCIPLES FOR MIRACLE WORKERS
1.
The miracle abolishes the need for lower-order concerns. Since
it is an out-of-pattern time interval, the ordinary considerations
of time and space do not apply.When YOU perform a miracle, I
will arrange both time and space to adjust to it.
2.
Clear distinction between what HAS BEEN created and what IS
BEING created is essential. ALL forms of correc

[Page 77]
present.Time is under MY direction, but Timelessness belongs
to God alone. In time we exist for and with each other. In
Timelessness we coexist with God.
ATONEMENT WITHOUT SACRIFICE
There is another point which must be perfectly clear before any
residual fear which may still be associated with miracles becomes
entirely groundless. The crucifixion did NOT establish the
Atonement.The Resurrection did.This is a point which many very
sincere Christians have misunderstood. No-one who is free of the
s

[Page 78]
punished because YOU were bad. The wholly benign lesson the
Atonement teaches is lost if it is tainted with this kind of distortion
in ANY form.
“Vengeance is Mine sayeth the Lord” is a strictly karmic
viewpoint. It is a real misperception of truth, by which man assigns
his own “evil” past to God.The “evil conscience” from the past has
nothing to do with God. He did not create it and He does not
maintain it.God does NOT believe in karmic retribution.His Divine
Mind does not create that way. HE d

[Page 79]
to learn from many smaller lessons.
NOTHING can prevail against a Son of God who commends his
Spirit into the hands of his Father. By doing this, the mind awakens
from its sleep and remembers its Creator. All sense of separation
disappears, and level confusion vanishes.The Son of God IS part of
the Holy Trinity, but the Trinity Itself is ONE.There is no confusion
within Its levels because they are of One Mind and One Will.This
Single Purpose creates perfect integration and establishes the peace 

[Page 80]
mind can perceive ANYTHING. A pure mind knows the truth, and
this IS its strength. It cannot attack the body because it recognizes
exactly what the body IS.This is what “a sane mind in a sane body”
really means. It does NOT confuse destruction with innocence
because it associates innocence with strength, NOT with weakness.
Innocence is INCAPABLE of sacriﬁcing anything, because the
innocent mind HAS everything and strives only to PROTECT its
wholeness. This is why it CANNOT misproject. It can onl

[Page 81]
universal in its application that it becomes wisdom. Innocent (or
true) perception means that you NEVER misperceive and ALWAYS
see truly. More simply, it means that you never see what does not
really exist.When you lack conﬁdence in what someone will do, you
are attesting to your belief that he is not in his right mind.This is
hardly a miracle-based frame of reference. It also has the disastrous
effect of denying the creative power of the miracle.
The miracle perceives everything AS IT IS. If no

[Page 82]
True perception is the BASIS for knowledge, but KNOWING is
the afﬁrmation of truth.All your difﬁculties ultimately stem from the
fact that you do not recognize or KNOW yourselves, each other, or
God.To recognize means to “know again,” implying that you knew
before. You can see in many ways, because perception involves
different interpretations, and this means that it is not whole. The
miracle is a way of perceiving, NOT of knowing.It is the right answer
to a question, and you do not ask question

[Page 83]
NOT for right DOING. Perception, miracles and doing are closely
related. Knowledge is the result of revelation, and induces only
thought. Perception involves the body even in its most spiritualized
form.Knowledge comes from the altar within,and is timeless because
it is certain.To perceive the truth is NOT the same as knowing it.
If you attack error in one another, you will hurt yourself.You
cannot RECOGNIZE each other when you attack.Attack is ALWAYS
made on a stranger.You are MAKING him a stra

[Page 84]
created by the separation cannot BUT conﬂict.This is because they
are essentially meaningless to each other.
Freud realized this perfectly, and that is why he conceived the
different levels in his view of the psyche as forever irreconcilable.
They were conﬂict-prone by deﬁnition because they wanted
different things and obeyed different principles. In OUR picture of
the psyche, there is an unconscious level which properly consists
ONLY of the miracle ability, and which should be under MY
directio

[Page 85]
eventually choose to heal the separation.
Right-mindedness is not to be confused with the KNOWING
mind because it is applicable only to right perception.You can be
right-minded or wrong-minded, and even this is subject to degrees, a
fact which clearly demonstrates a lack of association with knowledge.
The term “right-mindedness”is properly used as the CORRECTION
for “wrong-mindedness,” and applies to the state of mind which
induces accurate perception. It is miraculous because it HEALS
mispercep

[Page 86]
light does abolish darkness merely by establishing the fact that it is not
there.The truth will ALWAYS overcome error in this sense.This is not
an ACTIVE process of destruction at all.We have already emphasized
that knowledge does not DO ANYTHING. It can be PERCEIVED as
an attacker,but it CANNOT attack.What man perceives as its attack is
merely his own vague recognition of the fact that it can always be
REMEMBERED, never having been destroyed.
God and the Souls He created remain in surety, and t

[Page 87]
the union of my will with the Father’s.We can now make a distinction
which will greatly facilitate clarity in our subsequent statements.
Since the separation, the words “create” and “make” have been
greatly confused. When you make something, you make it out of a
sense of lack or need. Anything that is made is made for a speciﬁc
purpose, and has no true generalizability.When you make something
to ﬁll a perceived lack, which is obviously why you would want to
make anything, you are tacitly implyin

[Page 88]
in a creative outcome, although it has resulted in considerable
ingenuity. It is noteworthy, however, that this ingenuity has almost
totally divorced him from knowledge. Knowledge does not
REQUIRE ingenuity.When we say “the truth shall set you free,” we
mean that all this kind of thinking is a waste of time, but that you
ARE free of the need to engage in it if you are willing to let it go.
Prayer is a way of asking for something. Prayer is the medium of
miracles, but the only meaningful prayer i

[Page 89]
Miracle is to know Him.
Forgiveness is the healing of the perception of separation.
Correct perception OF EACH OTHER is necessary, because minds
have willed to see themselves as separate. Each Soul knows God
completely.That IS the miraculous power of the Soul.The fact that
each One has this power completely is a fact that is entirely alien to
human thinking, in which if anyone has everything, there is nothing
LEFT. God’s Miracles are as total as His Thoughts because they ARE
His Thoughts.
As lon

[Page 90]
no effect. This cannot be true unless he also believes that what he
judged against does not exist. He evidently does NOT believe this, or
he would not have judged against it. It does not matter, in the end,
whether you judge right or wrong. Either way, you are placing your
belief in the unreal. This cannot be avoided in any type of
judgement, because it implies the belief that reality is yours to
choose FROM.
You have no idea of the tremendous release and deep peace that
comes from meeting yours

[Page 91]
will also use the term with considerable fear, believing that
judgement will someday be used against YOU.To whatever extent it
IS used against you, it is due only to your belief in its efﬁcacy as a
weapon of defense for your own authority.The issue of authority is
really a question of authorship.When an individual has an “authority
problem,” it is ALWAYS because he believes he is the author of
himself, projects his delusion onto others, and then perceives the
situation as one in which people are

[Page 92]
inheritance IS. The problem which everyone must decide is the
fundamental question of authorship. All fear comes ultimately and
sometimes by way of very devious routes, from the denial of
Authorship.The offense is never to God, but only to those who deny
Him.To deny His Authorship is to deny themselves the reason for
their own peace, so that they see themselves only in pieces. This
strange perception IS the authority problem.
There is no man who does not feel that he is imprisoned in
some way. I

[Page 93]
deceives by lies, and builds kingdoms of his own, in which everything
is in direct opposition to God.Yet he ATTRACTS men rather than
repels them, and they are seen as willing to “sell” him their Souls in
return for gifts they RECOGNIZE are of no real worth.
This makes absolutely no sense. The whole picture is one in
which man acts in a way he HIMSELF realizes is self-destructive, but
which he does not choose to correct, and therefore perceives the
cause as beyond his control.We have discussed th

[Page 94]
is the central foundation stone in your thought system, and all your
defenses are used to attack ideas which might bring it to light.You
still believe you are images of your own creation.Your minds are split
with your Souls on this point, and there is NO resolution while you
believe the one thing that is literally inconceivable.That is why you
CANNOT create, and are ﬁlled with fear about what you make.
The mind can make the belief in separation VERY real and
VERY fearful, and this belief is the 

[Page 95]
f o u r
The Root of all Evil
The Bible says that you should go with a brother twice as far as he
asks. It certainly does not suggest that you set him back on his
journey. Devotion to a brother cannot set YOU back, either. It can
lead ONLY to mutual progress. The result of genuine devotion is
inspiration, a word which, properly understood, is the opposite of
fatigue.To be fatigued is to be DIS-spirited,but to be inspired is to be
in the spirit. To be egocentric IS to be dispirited, but to be self

[Page 96]
and ﬁnally, the cruciﬁxion of the body, or death.
Repetition compulsions can be endless unless they are given up
by an act of will. Do not make the pathetic human error of “clinging
to the old rugged cross.” The only message of the cruciﬁxion was
that we can OVERCOME the cross. Unless you do so, you are free to
crucify yourself as often as you choose. But this is not the Gospel I
intended to offer you.We have another journey to undertake, and if
you will read these lessons carefully, they will h

[Page 97]
change towards HEALING the separation.They ALWAYS perceive it as
a change towards further separation, because the separation was their
ﬁrst experience of change.
You believe that, if you allow no change to enter into your ego,
your Soul will ﬁnd peace.This profound confusion is possible only if
one maintains that the same thought system can stand on two
foundations. NOTHING can reach the Soul from the ego, and
nothing FROM the Soul can strengthen the ego, or reduce the
conﬂict within it.The ego 

[Page 98]
him.This is the one real goal of the parent,teacher and therapist.This
goal will not be achieved by those who believe that they will LOSE
their child or pupil or patient if they succeed. It is IMPOSSIBLE to
convince the ego of this because it goes against all of its own laws.
But remember that laws are set up to protect the continuity of the
system in which the law-maker BELIEVES.
It is natural enough for the ego to try to protect itself, once you
have made it, but it is NOT natural for YOU to w

[Page 99]
because you KNOW it is not real.The only SANE solution is not to try
to change reality,which is indeed a fearful attempt,but to see it as it IS.
YOU are part of reality, which stands unchanged beyond the reach of
your ego, but within easy reach of your Soul.When you are afraid, be
still and KNOW that God is real and YOU are His beloved Son in
whom He is well pleased.Do not let your ego dispute this,because the
ego cannot know what is as far beyond its reach as you are.
God is NOT the author of f

[Page 100]
but of your Souls you can do everything for the salvation of both.
Humility is a lesson for the ego, NOT for the Soul. The Soul is
beyond humility because it recognizes its radiance, and gladly sheds
its light everywhere.The meek shall inherit the earth because their
egos are humble and this gives them better perception.The Kingdom
of Heaven is the RIGHT of the Soul, whose beauty and dignity are
far beyond doubt, beyond perception, and stand forever as the mark
of the Love of God for His creatio

[Page 101]
Perception,however,is always speciﬁc,and therefore quite concrete.
Each man makes one ego for himself, although it is subject to
enormous variation because of its instability, and one for everyone he
perceives,which is equally variable.Their interaction is a process which
literally alters both, because they were not made either BY or WITH
the unalterable.It is particularly important to realize that this alteration
can and does occur as readily when the interaction takes place IN THE
MIND as when

[Page 102]
is NOT the self. Undermining the ego’s thought system MUST be
perceived as painful, even though this is anything but true. Babies
scream in rage if you take away a knife or a scissors,even though they
may well harm themselves if you do not.The speed-up has placed
you in the same position.
You are NOT prepared, and in this sense you ARE babies.You
have no sense of real self-preservation, and are very likely to decide
that you need precisely what would hurt you most. Whether you
know it now or not

[Page 103]
is beyond its grasp, and charity becomes impossible.The ego NEVER
gives out of abundance, because it was made as a SUBSTITUTE for
it. That is why the concept of “getting” arose in the ego’s thought
system.All appetites are “getting” mechanisms, representing the ego’s
need to conﬁrm itself.This is as true of bodily appetites as it is of the
so-called “higher” ego needs. Bodily appetites are NOT physical in
origin.The ego regards the body as its home and DOES try to satisfy
itself through the body

[Page 104]
one maintains that the ego existed before that point in time. The
religiously ego-oriented believe that the Soul existed before and will
continue to exist afterwards, after a temporary lapse in ego life. Some
actually believe that the Soul will be punished for this lapse, even
though in reality, it could not possibly know anything about it.
The term “salvation” does NOT apply to the Soul, which is not
in danger, and does not need to be salvaged. Salvation is nothing
more than “right-mindedness,”

[Page 105]
The more recent ecological emphases are but another ingenious
way of trying to impose order on chaos.We have already credited the
ego with considerable ingenuity, though not with creativeness. It
should, however, be remembered that inventiveness is really wasted
effort, even in its most ingenious forms.We do not have to explain
ANYTHING. This is why we need not trouble ourselves with
inventiveness.The highly speciﬁc nature of invention is not worthy
of the abstract creativity of God’s creations.

[Page 106]
experiences threat, and not only censors but also reinterprets the
data. However, as Freud correctly pointed out, what you have
repressed can retain a very active life BEYOND your awareness.
Repression thus operates to conceal not only the baser impulses
but also the most lofty ones from awareness because BOTH are
threatening to the ego and, being concerned primarily with its own
preservation in the face of threat, the ego perceives them AS THE
SAME.The threat-value of the lofty is actually much

[Page 107]
Father, the ego has no allegiance to its own maker. You cannot
conceive of the real relationship which exists between God and His
Souls because of the hatred you have for the self YOU have made.
You project onto your OWN idea of yourself the will to separate,
which conﬂicts with the love you feel for what you made BECAUSE
you made it. No human love is without this ambivalence, and since
no ego has experienced love WITHOUT ambivalence,the concept is
beyond its understanding.
Love will enter immed

[Page 108]
I will never forsake you, any more than God will, but I MUST
wait as long as you choose to forsake yourself. Because I wait in love
and not in impatience you will surely ask me truly. I will come in
response to a single unequivocal call.Watch carefully and see what it
is you are really asking for. Be very honest with yourself about this,
for we must hide nothing from each other.If you will really try to do
this, you have taken the ﬁrst step toward preparing your mind for the
Holy One to enter.We

[Page 109]
minds are ﬁlled with schemes to save the face of your egos, and you
do not seek the Face of God.The glass in which the ego seeks to see
its face is dark indeed. How can it maintain the trick of its existence
except with mirrors? But where YOU look to ﬁnd yourself is up
to you.
We have said that you cannot change your mind by changing
your behavior, but we have also said, and many times before, that you
CAN change your mind.When your mood tells you that you have
chosen wrongly, and this is so whe

[Page 110]
deceived by it. KNOW it offers you nothing.When you have given
up this voluntary dispiriting, you will see how your mind can focus
and rise above fatigue and heal.Yet you are not sufﬁciently vigilant
AGAINST the demands of the ego to disengage yourself. THIS
NEED NOT BE.
The habit of engaging WITH God and His creations is easily
made if you actively refuse to let your minds slip away.The problem is
NOT one of concentration; it is the belief that no-one, including
yourself,is WORTH consistent eff

[Page 111]
nothing more than the end of the ego’s rule over part of the minds of
men, and the healing of the mind. I was created like you in the ﬁrst,
and I have called you to join with me in the second. If you will think
over your lives you will see how carefully the preparations were
made. I am in charge of the Second Coming, and my judgement,
which is used only for protection, cannot be wrong because it
NEVER attacks. YOURS is so distorted that you believe I was
mistaken in choosing you. I assure you th

[Page 112]
AGAINST the ego,and must be obliterated BY the ego in the interest
of its self-preservation.
A major source of the ego’s off-balanced state is its lack of
discrimination between impulses from God and from the body.Any
thought system which makes this confusion MUST be insane.Yet this
demented state is ESSENTIAL to the ego,which judges only in terms
of threat or non-threat TO ITSELF. In one sense the ego’s fear of the
idea of God is at least logical, since this idea DOES dispel the ego.
Fear of di

[Page 113]
experience, let me remind you that learning and WANTING to learn
are inseparable. All learners learn best when they believe that what
they are trying to learn is of VALUE to them. However, values in this
world are hierarchical, and not everything you may want to learn has
lasting value.
Indeed, many of the things you want to learn are chosen
BECAUSE their value will not last.The ego thinks it is an advantage
not to commit itself to ANYTHING that is eternal because the
eternal MUST come from God.

[Page 114]
possibility of perpetual MOTION, but NOT to perpetual thoughts.
Ideational preoccupations with problems set up to be incapable
of solution are also favorite ego devices for impeding the strong-
willed from making real learning progress.The problems of squaring
the circle and carrying pi to inﬁnity are good examples. A more
recent ego attempt is particularly noteworthy.The idea of preserving
the BODY by suspension, thus giving it the kind of limited
immortality which the ego can tolerate, is amon

[Page 115]
THE CONSTANT STATE 
It cannot be emphasized too often that correcting perception is
merely a temporary expedient. It is necessary to do so only because
misperception is a block to knowledge, while accurate perception is
a stepping-stone TOWARDS it.The whole value of right perception
lies in the inevitable judgement which it entails that it IS
unnecessary.This removes the block entirely.You may ask how this is
possible as long as you appear to be living in this world,and since this
is a sensible 

[Page 116]
would not believe that you ARE here. In learning to escape from the
illusions you have made, your great debt to each other is something
you must never forget. It is exactly the same debt that you owe to
me. Whenever you react egotistically towards each other, you are
throwing away the graciousness of your indebtedness, and the holy
perception it would produce.
The term “holy” can be used here because, as you learn how
much you ARE indebted to the whole Sonship, which INCLUDES
me, you come as clo

[Page 117]
chosen to live so as to demonstrate that you are NOT an ego. I repeat
that I do not choose God’s channels wrongly.The Holy One shares
my trust, and always approves my Atonement decisions because my
will is never out of accord with His. I have told you before that I am
in charge of the whole Atonement. This is ONLY because I
completed my part in it as a man, and can now complete it through
other men. My chosen receiving and sending channels cannot fail
because I will lend them MY strength as long

[Page 118]
I am conditioning you to associate misery with the ego and joy
with the Soul. You have conditioned yourselves the other way
around. A far greater reward, however, will break through any
conditioning, if it is repeatedly offered whenever the old habit
pattern is broken. You are still free to choose, but can you really
WANT the rewards of the ego in the presence of the rewards of God? 
CREATION AND COMMUNICATION 
It should be clear by now that, while the content of any particular
ego-illusion does

[Page 119]
communication with every aspect of creation because it is in
complete and direct communication with its Creator.
THIS communication IS the Will of God. Creation and
communication are synonymous. God created every mind by
communicating His Mind to it, thus establishing it forever as a
channel for the reception of His Mind and Will. Since only beings of
a like order can truly communicate, His creations naturally
communicate WITH Him and LIKE Him. This communication is
perfectly abstract in that it

[Page 120]
creation, His joy is not complete because YOURS is incomplete.And
THIS He does know. He knows it in His own Being and Its
experience of His Son’s experience.The constant GOING OUT of
His Love is blocked when His channels are closed, and He IS lonely
when the minds He created do not communicate fully with Him.
God HAS kept your kingdom for you, but He cannot share His
joy with you until you know it with your whole mind. Even
revelation is not enough,because it is communication FROM God.It
is not 

[Page 121]
overt neglect of those in need of help, but it is often little more than
a painful attempt on the part of the halt to lead the blind.
The ego is likely to fear broken bodies because it cannot
tolerate them.The ego cannot tolerate ego weakness either without
ambivalence because it is afraid of its own weakness as well as the
weakness of its chosen home.When it is threatened, the ego blocks
your natural impulse to help, placing you under the strain of divided
will.You may then be tempted to withdr

[Page 122]
f i v e
Healing and Wholeness 
To heal is to make happy. I have told you before to think how many
opportunities you have to gladden yourselves, and how many you
have refused. This is exactly the same as telling you that you have
refused to heal yourselves.The light that belongs to you is the light of
joy. Radiance is not associated with sorrow. Depression is often
contagious, but although it may affect those who come in contact
with it, they do not yield to the inﬂuence whole-heartedly. But joy


[Page 123]
The light is so strong that it radiates throughout the Sonship, and
returns thanks to the Father for radiating His joy upon it.Only God’s
holy children are worthy to be channels of His beautiful joy, because
only they are beautiful enough to hold it by sharing it. It is
impossible for a Child of God to love his neighbor EXCEPT as
himself.That is why the healer’s prayer is:
“Let me know this brother as I know myself.”
HEALING AS JOINING 
Healing is an act of thought by which two minds perceive th

[Page 124]
Let us start our process of re-awakening with just a few simple
concepts:
“Thoughts INCREASE by being given away.
The more who believe in them, the STRONGER they become.
EVERYTHING is an idea.
How, then, is it possible that giving and losing CAN be
meaningfully associated?”
This is the invitation to the Holy Spirit. I told you that I could
reach up and bring the Holy Spirit down to you, but I can bring
Him to you ONLY at your own invitation. The Holy Spirit is
nothing more than your own right mi

[Page 125]
healing, and no-one was comfortless.
THE MIND OF THE ATONEMENT 
God honored even the miscreations of His Children because they
had made them, but He also blessed them with a way of thinking
that could raise their perceptions until they became so lofty that they
could reach almost back to Him.The Holy Spirit is the Mind of the
Atonement. It represents a state of mind that comes close enough to
One-Mindedness that transfer to it is at last possible.Transfer depends
on common elements in the old le

[Page 126]
although you can keep it asleep, you cannot obliterate it.
God Himself keeps this will alive by transmitting it from His
Mind to yours as long as there is time. It is partly His and partly
yours.The miracle itself is just this fusion or union of will between
Father and Son.The Holy Spirit is the spirit of joy. He is the Call to
return with which God blessed the minds of His separated Sons.This
is the vocation of the mind. The mind had no calling until the
separation because, before that, it had 

[Page 127]
can share only perfect knowledge. Guidance is evaluative because it
implies that there is a RIGHT way and also a WRONG way, one to
be chosen and the other to be avoided.By choosing one,you give up
the other.
This IS a conﬂict state. It MEANS that knowledge has been lost
because knowledge is sure. God is not in you in a literal sense; YOU
are part of HIM.When you chose to leave Him, He gave you a Voice
to speak FOR Him because He could no longer share His
knowledge with you without hindrance. Dir

[Page 128]
God. He is your remaining communication with God, which you
can interrupt but cannot destroy.
The Holy Spirit is the way in which God’s Will can be done on
earth as it is in Heaven. Both Heaven and earth are in YOU because
the call of both is in your will, and therefore in your mind.The Voice
for God comes from your own altars to Him. These altars are not
things; they are DEVOTIONS. Yet you have other devotions now.
Your divided devotion has given you the two voices, and you must
choose at which

[Page 129]
we increase its power to attract the whole Sonship, and to bring it
back into the Oneness in which it was created. Remember that
“yoke” means “join together” and “burden” means message. Let us
reconsider the Biblical statement “my yoke is easy and my burden
light” in this way; let us join together, for my message is Light.
I came into your minds because you had grown vaguely aware
of the fact that there IS another way, or another Voice. Having given
this invitation to the Holy Spirit, I could co

[Page 130]
being given away. It increases in YOU as you give it to your brothers.
Since thoughts do not have to be conscious to exist, your brother
does not have to be aware of the Holy Spirit, either in himself or in
you, for this miracle to occur.
Your brother may have dissociated the Call for God,just as YOU
have. The dissociation is healed in BOTH of you as YOU become
aware of the Call for God in him, and thus acknowledge its BEING.
There are two ways of seeing your brother which are diametrically
oppo

[Page 131]
the ego’s domain, accepts it without question. The only aspect of
time which is really eternal is NOW. That is what we really mean
when we say that “now is the only time.”The literal nature of this
statement does not mean anything to the ego, which interprets it, at
best, to mean “don’t worry about the future.” That is not what it
really means at all.
The Holy Spirit is the Mediator between the interpretations of
the ego and the knowledge of the Soul. His ability to deal with
symbols enables Him

[Page 132]
The ego is the symbol of separation,just as the Holy Spirit is the
symbol of peace.What you perceive in others you are strengthening
in YOURSELF.You let your mind misperceive, but the Holy Spirit
lets your mind reinterpret its own misperceptions.The Holy Spirit is
the perfect teacher. He uses only what your minds ALREADY
understand to teach you that you do NOT understand it.The Holy
Spirit can deal with an unwilling learner without going counter to
his will because part of his will IS still for 

[Page 133]
but LESS than knowledge of your real relationships TO them because
you did not accept them as PART of you. Understanding IS beyond
perception because it introduces meaning. It is, however, below
knowledge, even though it can grow TOWARDS it. It is possible,
with great effort, to understand someone else to some extent and to
be quite helpful to him, but the effort is misdirected. The
misdirection is quite apparent; it is directed away from YOU.
This does not mean that it is LOST to you, but it DO

[Page 134]
without sharing, and for asking pardon without change. The ego
NEVER calls for REAL Atonement, and cannot tolerate forgiveness,
which IS change.
Your concept of “healthy guilt feelings” has merit, but without
the concept of the Atonement it lacks the healing potential it holds.
You made the distinction in terms of feelings which led to a decision
not to REPEAT the error, which is only PART of healing. Your
concept lacked the idea of UNDOING it. What you were really
advocating, then, was adopting

[Page 135]
submit to violence without protest. It means that you cannot BE
hurt, and do not want to show your brother anything EXCEPT your
wholeness. Show him that he CANNOT hurt you and hold nothing
against him, or you hold it against yourself.Teaching is done in many
ways, – by formal means, by guidance, and above all BY EXAMPLE.
Teaching is therapy because it means the SHARING of ideas, and the
awareness that to share them is to STRENGTHEN them.The union
of the Sonship IS its protection.The ego cannot p

[Page 136]
parts of your thoughts which are of Him, and which He also keeps
for YOU.And of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.All the rest remains
with you until He has re-interpreted them in the light of the
Kingdom, making them, too, worthy of being shared. When they
have been sufﬁciently puriﬁed He lets you give them away.The will
to share them IS their puriﬁcation.
The Atonement gives you the power of a healed mind, but the
power to create is of God.Therefore, those who have been forgiven
must devote themse

[Page 137]
the blessed residue is restored, and therefore continues in creation.
What is truly blessed is incapable of giving rise to guilt, and
MUST give rise to joy.This makes it invulnerable to the ego because
its peace is unassailable.It is invulnerable to disruption BECAUSE it is
whole. Guilt is ALWAYS disruptive. Anything that engenders fear is
divisive because it obeys the law of division. If the ego is the symbol
of the separation, it is also the symbol of guilt. Guilt is more than
merely not of Go

[Page 138]
attended with guilt because it IS the belief in sin.
The ego does not perceive sin as a lack of love.It perceives sin as
a POSITIVE ACT OF ASSAULT. This is an interpretation which is
necessary to the ego’s survival because, as soon as you regard sin as a
LACK, you will automatically attempt to remedy the situation. And
you will succeed.The ego regards this as doom, but YOU must learn
to regard it as freedom.The guiltless mind CANNOT suffer. Being
sane, it heals the body because IT has been heale

[Page 139]
Irrational thought is a thought DISORDER.God Himself orders
your thought because your thought was created BY Him. Guilt
feelings are always a sign that you do not know this.They also show
that you believe you can think apart from God AND WANT TO.
Every thought disorder is attended by guilt at its inception and
maintained by guilt in its continuance. Guilt is inescapable for those
who believe they order their own thought and must therefore obey its
orders.This makes them feel RESPONSIBLE for thei

[Page 140]
is both free and alterable.You do not belong in time.Your place is
ONLY in eternity, where God Himself placed you forever.
Guilt feelings are the PRESERVERS of time.They induce fears
of future retaliation or abandonment, and thus ensure that the future
will remain like the past.This is the ego’s continuity,and gives it a false
sense of security through the belief that you cannot escape from it.
But you can and MUST. God offers you the continuity of eternity in
exchange. When you choose to make t

[Page 141]
interpretations have misled you. A favorite ego quotation is “As ye
sow, so shall ye reap.” Another is “Vengeance is mine, sayeth the
Lord.” Still another is “I will visit the sins of the father unto the third
and fourth generation,” and also “The wicked shall perish.”There are
many others, but if you will let the Holy Spirit re-interpret these in
His own light, they will sufﬁce.
“As ye sow,so shall ye reap”merely means that what you believe
to be worth cultivating you will cultivate in yourself

[Page 142]
“Do not look there.” It is still true that “where you look to ﬁnd
yourself is up to you.”The Higher Court will NOT condemn you. It
will merely dismiss the case against you.There can BE no case against
a Child of God, and every witness to guilt in God’s creations is
bearing false witness to God Himself.
Appeal everything you believe gladly to God’s Own Higher
Court because it speaks for Him, and therefore speaks truly. It will
dismiss the case against you however carefully YOU have built it.The
c

[Page 143]
ﬁxed on God. It is also ﬁxed in you.You, then, ARE ﬁxed in the
peace of God.The concept of “Fixation” is also a very helpful one
which Freud understood perfectly. Unfortunately, he lost his
understanding because he was afraid, and, as you know all too well,
fear is incompatible with good judgement.Fear distorts thinking,and
therefore DISorders thought.
Freud’s system of thought was extremely ingenious because
Freud was extremely ingenious, and a mind MUST endow its
thoughts with its own attribut

[Page 144]
told him,or better,reminded him of,he was too honest to deny more
than was necessary to keep his fear in tolerable bounds as he perceived
the situation.Therefore,he emphasized that the point in development
at which the mind is ﬁxated is more real to ITSELF than the external
reality with which it disagrees.This,again,could have been a powerful
RELEASE mechanism had Freud not decided to involve it in a strong
DEFENSE system because he perceived it as an attack.
Third, although Freud interpreted fi

[Page 145]
and use the inﬁnite power OF His care for all those He created BY it.
There have been many healers who did not heal themselves.
They have not moved mountains by their faith because their faith
was not whole. Some of them have healed the sick at times, but they
have not raised the dead. Unless the healer heals HIMSELF he does
NOT believe that there is no order of difﬁculty in miracles. He has
not learned that EVERY mind God created is equally worthy of
being healed BECAUSE GOD CREATED IT WHOLE. Y

[Page 146]
5  HEALING AND WHOLENESS
116
that you must ALREADY have made a decision NOT to be wholly
joyous if that is how you feel.Therefore, the ﬁrst step in the undoing
is to recognize that you ACTIVELY DECIDED WRONGLY, but can
AS ACTIVELY DECIDE OTHERWISE. Be very ﬁrm with yourselves
in this, and keep yourselves fully aware of the fact that the undoing
process, which does NOT come from you, is nevertheless WITHIN
you because God placed it there. YOUR part is merely to return
your thinking to the point a

[Page 147]
s i x
Attack and Fear 
The relationship of anger to attack is obvious, but the inevitable
association of anger and FEAR is not always so clear.Anger ALWAYS
involves PROJECTION OF SEPARATION, which must ultimately
be accepted as entirely one’s own responsibility.Anger cannot occur
unless you believe that you have been attacked; that your attack was
justiﬁed; and that YOU are in no way responsible. Given these three
wholly irrational premises, the equally irrational conclusion that a
brother is WO

[Page 148]
yourselves have been willing to redirect. You cannot doubt the
strength of your devotion,when you consider how faithfully you have
observed it. It was quite evident that you had already developed the
ability to follow a better model, if you could accept it.
THE MESSAGE OF THE CRUCIFIXION 
For teaching purposes, let us consider the cruciﬁxion again.We have
not dwelt on it before, because of its fearful connotations.The only
emphasis we laid upon it was that it was NOT a form of punishment.
Nothin

[Page 149]
little doubt that one BODY can assault another, and can even destroy
it. Yet if destruction ITSELF is impossible, then anything that is
destructible cannot be REAL. Therefore, its destruction does NOT
justify anger.To the extent to which you believe that it DOES, you
must be accepting false premises AND TEACHING THEM TO
OTHERS.The message which the cruciﬁxion was intended to teach
was that it is not necessary to perceive ANY form of assault in
persecution because you cannot BE persecuted. If you

[Page 150]
name of the Kingdom of God, but ﬁrst believe that it is true for
YOU, or you will teach amiss.
My brothers slept during the so-called “agony” in the garden,
but I could not be angry with them because I had learned I could
not BE abandoned. Peter swore he would never deny me, but he did
so three times. He did offer to defend me with the sword, which I
naturally refused, not being at all in need of bodily protection. I AM
sorry when my brothers do not share my decision to hear only one
voice, beca

[Page 151]
Whom we SHARE, makes this unnecessary.To USE my experiences
constructively, however, you must still follow my example in how to
perceive them.
My brothers and yours are constantly engaged in justifying the
unjustiﬁable. My one lesson, which I must teach as I learned, is that
no perception which is out of accord with the judgement of the
Holy Spirit CAN be justiﬁed. I undertook to show this was true in a
very extreme case merely because it would serve as a good teaching
aid to those whose temptat

[Page 152]
not felt guilty they never could have quoted me as saying,“I come
not to bring peace but a sword.”This is clearly the exact opposite of
everything I taught.
Nor could they have described my reactions to Judas as they did
if they had really understood me. They would have realized I
COULD not have said,“Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?”
unless I BELIEVED in betrayal.The whole message of the cruciﬁxion
was simply that I did NOT.The “punishment” which I am said to
have called forth upon Ju

[Page 153]
their joint salvation. Each one must learn to teach that all forms of
rejection are utterly meaningless. The separation IS the notion of
rejection.As long as you TEACH this, you still believe it.This is NOT
as God thinks, and you must think as He thinks if you are to know
Him again.
THE USES OF PROJECTION 
Any split in will MUST involve a rejection of part of it, and this IS
the belief in separation.The wholeness of God, which IS His peace,
cannot be appreciated EXCEPT by a whole mind, which rec

[Page 154]
directly to excluding you from your brothers. We have learned,
however, that there is another use of projection. Every ability of the
ego has a better counterpart because its abilities are directed by the
mind, which has a better Voice.The Holy Spirit as well as the ego
utilizes projection, but since their goals are opposed, so is the result.
The Holy Spirit begins by perceiving YOU as perfect.
KNOWING this perfection is shared, He recognizes it in others, thus
strengthening it in both. Instead 

[Page 155]
the extensions of His Thought in His Mind. ALL His Thoughts are
thus perfectly united within themselves and with each other because
they were created neither partially nor in part. The Holy Spirit
enables you TO PERCEIVE THIS WHOLENESS NOW.You can no
more pray for yourselves alone than you can ﬁnd joy for yourself
alone. Prayer is the re-statement of INCLUSION, directed by the
Holy Spirit under the laws of God. God created you to create.You
cannot EXTEND His Kingdom until you know of its wholene

[Page 156]
what they ARE.
This is the way in which you MUST perceive God’s creations,
bringing all of your perceptions into the one parallel line which the
Holy Spirit sees.This line is the direct line of communication with
God, and lets your mind converge with HIS. There is no conﬂict
anywhere in this perception because it means that ALL perception is
guided by the Holy Spirit,Whose mind is ﬁxed on God. ONLY the
Holy Spirit can resolve conﬂict because ONLY the Holy Spirit is
conﬂict-free. He perceives ONL

[Page 157]
every idea begins in the mind of the thinker and extends outward.
Therefore, what extends FROM the mind IS STILL IN IT, and from
what it extends it knows ITSELF.That is its natural talent.The word
“knows” is correct here, even though the ego does NOT know, and
is not concerned with being at all.
The Holy Spirit still holds knowledge safe through His
impartial perception. By attacking nothing, He presents no barrier at
all to the communication of God.Thus, being is never threatened.
Your Godlike 

[Page 158]
TEACHING IT. Since you cannot NOT teach, your salvation lies in
teaching the exact OPPOSITE of everything the ego believes.This is
how YOU will learn the truth that will set you free, and keep you so
as others learn it of YOU.The only way to HAVE peace is to TEACH
peace. By learning it through projection, it becomes a part of what
you KNOW because you cannot teach what you have dissociated.
Only thus can you win back the knowledge that you threw
away.An idea which you SHARE you must HAVE. It awa

[Page 159]
the ego does NOT know.The Holy Spirit does not speak ﬁrst, BUT
HE ALWAYS ANSWERS. Everyone has called upon Him for help at
one time or another and in one way or another AND HAS BEEN
ANSWERED. Since the Holy Spirit answers truly, He answers FOR
ALL TIME, which means that everyone has the answer NOW.
The ego cannot hear the Holy Spirit, but it DOES believe that
part of the same mind that made it is AGAINST it.It interprets this as
a justiﬁcation for ATTACKING its maker. It believes that the best
d

[Page 160]
great reality for you because they are beautiful and true. In the
Kingdom, where you are and what you are is perfectly certain.There
is no doubt there because the ﬁrst question was never asked. Having
ﬁnally been wholly answered, IT HAS NEVER BEEN. Being alone
lives in the Kingdom, where everything lives in God without
question.The time that was spent on questioning in the dream has
given way to creation and to its eternity.
YOU are as certain as God because you are as true as He is, but
what wa

[Page 161]
His creations are perfect, does NOT insult them. This would be as
impossible as the ego’s notion that IT has insulted HIM.
That is why the Holy Spirit NEVER commands.To command is
to assume INequality, which the Holy Spirit demonstrates does not
exist. Fidelity to premises is a law of mind, and everything God
created is faithful to His laws. Fidelity to other laws is also possible,
however, not because the laws are true, but because YOU MADE
THEM.What would be gained if God proved to you that yo

[Page 162]
gentle Voice that will not frighten them,but will merely remind them
that the night is over and the Light has come? You do not inform
them that the nightmares which frightened them so badly were not
real because children BELIEVE in magic.You merely reassure them
that they are safe NOW.Then you train them to RECOGNIZE THE
DIFFERENCE between sleeping and waking, so that they will
understand they need not be afraid of dreams.Then,when bad dreams
come, they will call on the light THEMSELVES to dispe

[Page 163]
therefore not of the Kingdom.The body is the symbol of what you
THINK you are. It is clearly a separation device, and therefore does
not exist.The Holy Spirit, as always, takes what you have made and
translates it into a learning device FOR you.Again as always, He re-
interprets what the ego uses as an argument FOR separation into a
demonstration AGAINST it. If the mind can heal the body but the
body cannot heal the mind, then the mind must be STRONGER.
Every miracle demonstrates this.
We have s

[Page 164]
communicates only WHAT EACH ONE CAN GIVE TO ALL. He
never takes anything back because He wants YOU to keep it.
Therefore, His teaching begins with the lesson:
“To HAVE, GIVE all TO all”
This is a very preliminary step, and the only one you must take
for yourself. It is not even necessary that you COMPLETE the step
yourself, but it IS necessary that you turn in that direction. Having
chosen to go that way, you place YOURSELF in charge of the
journey, where you and ONLY you must remain.
This step 

[Page 165]
teachers realize that only fundamental change will last, but they do
not BEGIN at that level. Strengthening MOTIVATION for change is
their ﬁrst and foremost goal. It is also their last and ﬁnal one.
Increasing motivation for change IN THE LEARNER is all that
a teacher NEED do to guarantee change.This is because a change in
motivation IS a change of mind, and this will inevitably produce
fundamental change because the mind IS fundamental.The ﬁrst step
in the reversal or undoing process, then, is 

[Page 166]
in COMPLETE disagreement, peace of mind IS impossible. If you
TEACH both, which you will surely do as long as you ACCEPT
both, you are teaching conﬂict and LEARNING it.Yet you DO want
peace, or you would not have called upon the Voice for peace to help
you. His LESSON is not insane; the CONFLICT is.
There can BE no conﬂict between sanity and insanity. Only one
is true, and therefore only one is REAL.The ego tries to persuade
you that it is up to YOU to decide which voice is true, but the Holy
Sp

[Page 167]
As you take this step and HOLD THIS DIRECTION,you will be
pushing toward the center of your thought system, where the
FUNDAMENTAL change will occur. You are only beginning this
step now, but you have started on this way by realizing that ONLY
ONE WAY IS POSSIBLE.You do not yet realize this consistently and
so your progress is intermittent, but the second step is easier than the
ﬁrst because it FOLLOWS. The very fact that you have accepted
THAT is a demonstration of your growing awareness that th

[Page 168]
therefore to learn to BE without judgement. The undoing is
necessary only in YOUR mind, so that you cannot project falsely.
God Himself has established what you can project with perfect safety.
Therefore, the Holy Spirit’s third lesson is:
“Be vigilant ONLY for God and HIS Kingdom”
This is a major step toward FUNDAMENTAL change.Yet it is
still a lesson in thought reversal, since it implies that there is
something you must be vigilant AGAINST. It has advanced far from
the ﬁrst lesson which was PR

[Page 169]
If you allow yourselves to have in your minds ONLY what God
put there, you ARE acknowledging your mind as God created it.
Therefore, you are accepting it AS IT IS. Since it IS whole, you are
teaching peace BECAUSE you believe in it.The ﬁnal step will still be
taken FOR you by God, but by the third step, the Holy Spirit has
PREPARED you for God. He is GETTING YOU READY for the
translation of having into being by the very nature of the steps you
must take with Him.
You learn ﬁrst that having rests

[Page 170]
The wholeness of the Kingdom does NOT depend on your
perception, but your AWARENESS of its wholeness DOES. It is only
your awareness which NEEDS protection, since your being cannot
BE assailed.Yet a real sense of being CANNOT be yours while you
are doubtful of what you ARE. THIS IS WHY VIGILANCE IS
ESSENTIAL. Doubts about being must not enter your mind, or you
CANNOT know what you are with certainty. Certainty is OF God
for YOU. Vigilance is not necessary for truth, but it IS necessary
against I

[Page 171]
s e v e n
The Consistency of the
Kingdom 
The creative power of both God and His creations is limitless, but
they are not in reciprocal relationship.You DO communicate fully
with God, as He does with you.This is an ongoing process in which
you share,and BECAUSE you share it,you are inspired to create LIKE
God.Yet in creation you are not in reciprocal relation to God, since
He created YOU, but You did NOT create Him.We have already said
that only in this respect your creative power differs from H

[Page 172]
ACCEPTING this power as yours, you have learned to be what
you are.
Your creations belong in you,as you belong in God.You are part
of God, as your sons are part of His Sons.To create is to love. Love
extends outward simply because it cannot be contained. Being
limitless, IT DOES NOT STOP. It creates forever, but not in time.
God’s creations have always been, because HE has always been.
YOUR creations have always been, because you can create only as
God creates. Eternity is yours because He creat

[Page 173]
although this one you must know yourself, since BY it you know
what you are.This IS your being.
God does not TAKE steps because His accomplishments are not
gradual. He does not teach because His creations are changeless. He
does nothing LAST because He created FIRST and FOR ALWAYS. It
must be understood that the word “ﬁrst” as applied to Him is NOT a
time concept. He is ﬁrst in the sense that He is the ﬁrst in the Holy
Trinity Itself. He is the Prime Creator because He created His co-
creators. 

[Page 174]
must be adapted to circumstances, if they are to maintain order.
The outstanding characteristic of the laws of mind as they
operate in this world is that by obeying them – and I assure you that
you MUST obey them - you can arrive at diametrically opposed
results.This is because the laws have adapted to the circumstances of
this world, in which diametrically opposed outcomes ARE believed
in.The laws of mind govern thoughts, and you DO respond to two
conﬂicting voices.You have heard many arguments

[Page 175]
and therefore believe THEY are. IN the Kingdom there is no
teaching OR learning because there is no BELIEF. There is only
CERTAINTY. God and His Sons, in the surety of being, KNOW that
what you project you ARE.That form of the law is not adapted at all,
being the Law of Creation. God Himself created the law by creating
BY it.And His Sons, who create like Him, follow it gladly, knowing
that the increase of the Kingdom depends on it, just as their own
creation did.
Laws must be communicated if the

[Page 176]
forget,or relinquish,one to UNDERSTAND the other.This is the only
way you CAN learn consistency, so that you can ﬁnally BE consistent.
What can the perfect consistency of the Kingdom mean to the
confused? It is apparent that confusion INTERFERES with meaning,
and therefore PREVENTS THE LEARNER FROM APPRECIATING
it. There is NO confusion in the Kingdom, because there is only
ONE meaning.This meaning comes from God and IS God. Because
it is also YOU, you share it and EXTEND it as your Creator did.

[Page 177]
The results of such tests are evaluated relatively ASSUMING
maximal motivation, but this is because we are dealing with
ABILITIES, where degree of development is meaningful. This does
NOT mean that what the ability is used FOR is necessarily either
limited OR divided.Yet one thing is certain;abilities are POTENTIALS
for learning, and you will apply them to what you WANT to learn.
Learning is EFFORT, and effort means WILL.We have used the term
“abilities” in the plural because abilities began wit

[Page 178]
Kingdom of God Himself, He teaches you that ALL POWER IS
YOURS. Its application does not matter. It is ALWAYS maximal.Your
vigilance does not ESTABLISH it as yours,but it DOES enable you to
use it ALWAYS and in ALL WAYS.
When I said,“I am with you always,” I meant it literally. I am not
absent to ANYONE, in ANY situation. BECAUSE I am always with
you, YOU are the Way and the Truth and the Light.You did not make
this power any more than I did. It was created to BE shared, and
therefore cannot be 

[Page 179]
idea, because ALL your conﬂicts come from it. It is the belief that
conﬂicting interests are possible, and therefore you have accepted the
impossible as TRUE. How is that different from saying that you are
perceiving YOURSELF as unreal?
To be IN the Kingdom is merely to focus your full attention
ON it. As long as you believe that you can attend to what is NOT
true, you are accepting conﬂict as your CHOICE. Is it REALLY a
choice? It SEEMS to be, but seeming and reality are hardly the same.
You wh

[Page 180]
Whose laws are true. BECAUSE they are true they are perfectly
dependable, and therefore universal in application.The REAL aim of
science is neither prediction nor control, but ONLY understanding.
This is because it does NOT establish the laws it seeks; CANNOT
discover them through prediction; and has NO control over them at
all. Science is nothing more than an approach to WHAT ALREADY
IS. Like inspiration it can be misunderstood as magic, and WILL be
whenever it is undertaken as SEPARATE from wh

[Page 181]
ONLY for healing because He knows you ONLY as whole. BY
healing you learn of wholeness, and by learning of wholeness you
learn to remember God.You HAVE forgotten Him, but the Holy
Spirit still knows that your forgetting must be translated into a way of
REMEMBERING, and NOT perceived as a separate ability which
opposes an opposite.That is the way in which the ego tries to use
ALL abilities, since its goal is always to make you believe that YOU
are in opposition.
The ego’s goal is as uniﬁed as the

[Page 182]
existence in your brothers.This strengthens the Holy Spirit in BOTH
of you because it is a REFUSAL to acknowledge fear. Love needs
only this invitation. It comes freely to ALL the Sonship, being what
the Sonship IS. By your awakening TO it, you are merely forgetting
what you are NOT.This enables you to remember what you ARE.
HEALING AND THE CHANGELESSNESS OF MIND
The body is nothing more than a framework for developing abilities.
It is therefore a means for developing POTENTIALS, which is quite


[Page 183]
This is its totally insane premise, and so it proceeds accordingly.
Healing only STRENGTHENS. Magic ALWAYS tries to
weaken. Healing perceives NOTHING in the healer that everyone
else does not SHARE with him. Magic ALWAYS sees something
“special” in the healer, which he believes he can offer as a gift to
someone who does NOT have it. He may believe that the gift comes
FROM God to Him, but it is quite evident that he does not
understand God if he thinks he has something that others LACK.You
might 

[Page 184]
of God is wholly REAL. Healing can be counted on BECAUSE it is
inspired by His Voice, and is in accord with His laws.Yet if healing IS
consistence, it cannot be inconsistently understood. Understanding
MEANS consistence because GOD means consistence. Since that is
HIS meaning, it is also YOURS. Your meaning cannot BE out of
accord with His because your whole meaning, and your ONLY
meaning, comes FROM His and is LIKE His. God cannot be out of
accord with HIMSELF, and YOU cannot be out of accord w

[Page 185]
of fear, but which you will never love. The other shows you only
truth, which you will love because you will UNDERSTAND it.
Understanding is APPRECIATION, because what you understand
you can IDENTIFY with, and by making it part of YOU, you have
accepted it with love.
That is how God Himself created YOU; in understanding, in
appreciation, and in love.The ego is totally unable to understand this
because it does NOT understand what it makes; it does NOT
appreciate it, and it does NOT love it. It in

[Page 186]
upon you to love God AND His creations.You can appreciate the
Sonship ONLY as one. This is part of the law of creation, and
therefore governs ALL thought.
FROM VIGILANCE TO PEACE 
Although you can LOVE the Sonship only as one, you can
PERCEIVE it as fragmented. It is impossible, however, for you to see
something in PART of it that you will not attribute to ALL of it.That
is why attack is NEVER discrete, and why attack must be
relinquished ENTIRELY. If it is NOT relinquished entirely, it is not
r

[Page 187]
completely insane dilemma in a completely insane way. It does not
perceive ITS existence as threatened by projecting the threat onto
YOU, and perceiving your BEING as nonexistent. This ensures ITS
continuance, if you side with it, by guaranteeing that you will not
know your OWN safety.The ego cannot afford to know ANYTHING.
Knowledge is total, and the ego does not BELIEVE in totality. This
unbelief is its origin, and while the ego does not love YOU, it IS
faithful to its own antecedents, begetti

[Page 188]
cannot be vigilant for anything BUT God and His Kingdom. The
only reason you ﬁnd this difﬁcult is because you think there IS
something else. Belief does not require vigilance UNLESS it is
conﬂicted.If it is,there ARE conﬂicting components within it which
have engendered a state of war, and vigilance therefore has become
essential.Vigilance has no place at all in peace. It is necessary against
beliefs which are NOT true, and would never have been called upon
by the Holy Spirit if you had NOT beli

[Page 189]
It is not true. The ego therefore is totally committed to untruth,
perceiving in total contradiction to the Holy Spirit and to the
knowledge of God.
You can be perceived with meaning ONLY by the Holy Spirit
because your being IS the knowledge of God. Any belief that you
accept which is apart from this will obscure God’s Voice in you, and
will therefore obscure God TO you. Unless you perceive His
creation truly you cannot know the Creator, since God and His
creation are not separate. The Oneness 

[Page 190]
God’s Will, but YOURS. If your will is out of accord with God’s, you
are willing without meaning.Yet because God’s Will is unchangeable,
no REAL conﬂict of will is possible.This is the Holy Spirit’s perfectly
consistent teaching.
Creation, NOT separation,is your will BECAUSE it is God’s,and
nothing that opposes this means anything at all. Being a perfect
accomplishment, the Sonship can only accomplish perfectly,
extending the joy in which it was created, and identifying itself with
both its Crea

[Page 191]
be determines every response you make.
You do not need God’s blessing, since that you have forever, but
you DO need YOURS.The picture you see of yourselves is deprived,
unloving and very vulnerable.You CANNOT love this.Yet you can
very easily escape from it, or better, leave it behind. You are not
THERE, and that is not YOU. Do not see this picture in anyone, or
you have accepted it AS you. ALL illusions about the Sonship are
dispelled together,as they were MADE together.Teach no-one that he
is 

[Page 192]
perfection until you have honored all those who were created
LIKE you.
One Child of God is the ONLY teacher sufﬁciently worthy to
teach another. One Teacher is in all your minds, and He teaches the
same lesson to all. He always teaches you the inestimable worth of
EVERY Son of God, teaching it with inﬁnite patience born of the
inﬁnite Love for which he speaks. Every attack is a call for His
patience since ONLY His patience can translate attack into blessing.
Those who attack do not KNOW they are

[Page 193]
understanding this. There is only one way OUT of the world’s
thinking, just as there was only one way INTO it. Understand totally
by understanding TOTALITY.
Perceive ANY part of the ego’s thought system as wholly insane,
wholly delusional and wholly undesirable, and you have correctly
evaluated ALL of it. This correction enables you to perceive ANY
part of creation as wholly real, wholly perfect, and WHOLLY
DESIRABLE. Wanting this ONLY, you will HAVE this only, and
giving this only, you will BE 

[Page 194]
The ego, using its own warped version of the laws of God, utilizes
the power of the mind ONLY to defeat the mind’s real purpose. It
projects conﬂict FROM your mind to OTHER minds, in an attempt
to persuade you that you have gotten RID of it. This has several
fallacies which may not be so apparent.
Strictly speaking, conflict cannot BE projected precisely
BECAUSE it cannot be fully shared.Any attempt to keep PART of it
and get rid of another part does not really mean ANYTHING.
Remember that a con

[Page 195]
your belief in it onto anyone ELSE, or you will PRESERVE the
belief.When you are willing to accept sole responsibility for the ego’s
existence YOURSELF you will have laid aside all anger and all attack,
because they COME from an attempt to project responsibility for
your OWN errors. But having ACCEPTED the errors as yours, DO
NOT KEEP THEM. Give them over quickly to the Holy Spirit to be
undone completely, so that ALL their effects will vanish from your
minds, and from the Sonship AS A WHOLE.
Th

[Page 196]
part that is being sided AGAINST.To the Soul this is truth, because it
knows its fullness, and cannot conceive of any part from which it
is excluded.
The Soul KNOWS that the consciousness of all its brothers is
included in its own, as IT is included in God. The power of the
whole Sonship AND of its Creator is therefore the Soul’s own
fullness, rendering its creations equally whole and equal in
perfection.The ego cannot prevail against a totality which includes
God, and any totality MUST include 

[Page 197]
truth, which blocks joy because it blocks creation, and thus blocks
self-fulﬁlment. The unfulﬁlled MUST be depressed because their
self-fullness is unknown to them.Your creations are protected FOR
you because the Holy Spirit,Who is in your mind, knows of them
and can bring them INTO your awareness whenever you will let
Him. They are there as part of your own being because your
fulﬁlment INCLUDES them.The creations of every Son of God are
yours since every creation belongs to everyone, being crea

[Page 198]
the same thing with the premises of God?  
Your creations ARE the logical outcome of His premises. His
thinking has established them FOR you. They are therefore there,
EXACTLY where they belong.They belong in your mind as part of
your identiﬁcation with His, but your state of mind and your
recognition of what is IN your mind depends, at any given moment,
on what you believe ABOUT your mind.Whatever these beliefs may
be, they are the premises which will determine what you accept
INTO your mind.It

[Page 199]
OPPOSITE of God’s Will can be better for you.You also believe that
it is possible to DO the opposite of God’s WILL. Therefore, you
believe that an impossible choice is open to you, and one which is
both very fearful AND very desirable.Yet God WILLS. He does NOT
wish. YOUR will is as powerful as His because it IS His.The ego’s
wishes do not mean anything, because the ego wishes for the
impossible.You can WISH for the impossible, but you can WILL only
with God.This is the ego’s weakness, and YOUR 

[Page 200]
comfortless. His Voice WILL teach you how to distinguish between
pain and joy, and WILL lead you out of the confusion which you
have made. There IS no confusion in the mind of a Son of God,
whose will MUST be the Will of the Father because the Father’s Will
IS His Son.
Miracles are IN ACCORD with the Will of God, Whose Will
you do not know, because you are confused about what YOU will.
This means that you are confused about what you are. If you ARE
God’s Will and do not ACCEPT His WILL, you are 